Once around the
goblin. What's this all about then?
Well, back in October of
2015 at the Monacaya Observatory, three
astronomers, Dave Tholan, Chad Tragillo,
and Scott Shepard discovered a small
moving object. You can see it in the
animated uh display on the screen there
as this little tiny dot changing
position whilst all the distant stars
stayed
still. So this was given a catalog
number 2015 for the year of discovery
and then TG387.
These catalog numbers run A B C and when
they get to the end of the alphabet they
add a second letter and start going A a
AB ac. So you can see that TG was quite
a long way through that for the objects
that have been discovered in 2015 and
the 387 is a further designation just to
show just how many objects there really
were being tracked. Um, it's incredible
how the numbers are adding up. But 13th
of
October, it's getting on towards
Halloween and TG for the name. So, they
took the letters TG and gave this object
the nickname the goblin. I think that's
fantastic. There's a lovely picture of
Monaya there as well. So, what do we
know about the goblin, as I will call
it, and you'll see why I'm calling it
the goblin in a moment.
So originally thought to be over 300
kilometers in diameter and having a
fairly dark overall color, a fairly low
albido, the amount of light that is
reflected off it. Um was thought to be
about 15% probably because that's fairly
typical for these outer solar system
objects. Um the moon is actually very
dark. It only reflects something like 11
or 12% of the light. So that silvery
moon that you look up at actually it's
pretty
dark. Um but the goblin passed in front
of a star and that's gives
you a very good opportunity to estimate
the size as the diameter of the object
passes over the star. It the star
disappears for a while until reappearing
at the far side. And that gives you a
chord, a line across the circle of the
diameter of the oluding object. And so
if you time this occultation event as
it's called, and you know how fast the
object is moving in its orbit, you can
do the maths and come up with a number
for the diameter along that cord. And
they came out with 220 kilometers. Now,
this is most likely to be a slight
underestimate because you'd have to be
very lucky for it to go exactly along
the
fattest possible diameter, the fattest
possible cord of the object. So, it
still might be that actually it's
getting on for 300. Uh but at 220, if we
took that on face value, it would mean
that it was more reflective, somewhat
lighter in color, maybe 25% of the light
coming back. So, we're still not
absolutely certain of the size of this
object, but a fairly substantial um
sized uh planettoid in its own
right. Orbit wise, it's immensely
elliptical and very, very long. It comes
into the region just 65 AU from the sun.
So still more than twice as far away as
the likes of
Neptune. And that's still actually
outside the what we think is the outer
edge of the Kiper
belt. And on its extreme end, it's going
out to about 2,000 AU. A very very long
orbit indeed taking 32,000 years and
when we found it it was at 78 AU so
coming quite close in at near to its
perihelion inbound and we would not have
been able to see it if it had been
anywhere on the
extremes. Only on that inner leg nearer
the sun would it have been bright enough
to
see. Now, the other two objects that are
marked on there for comparison are
Sednner and another body called 2012
VP113. And right in the center of all of
those orbits is the sun and the major
planets terminating at Neptune there
with the outer blue orbit that you can
see. So, dwarfing the rest of the solar
system completely.
Now, since it was discovered and given
the catalog number of TG 387 and the
nickname of the Goblin, it has now
officially been
named Leia Kuhunura. I can't say that,
so I'm going to have to call it the
Goblin.
Sorry. These Hawaiian names are
fascinating. And in this particular
case, it actually refers
to a Hawaiian expression for the long
distance flight of the Pacific Golden
Plver, a bird that flies and flies for
such long distances. And they say about
it, it flies until land appears. And
that's what this Hawaiian word means,
which I'm not going to attempt to
pronounce because I just have no clue
how to do
it. So, the other objects on the map,
Sedna, discovered in 2003 by Mike Brown,
nearly a thousand kilometers in
diameter. Another long thin orbit and
were a real surprise at the time. 11,000
years was thought to be
immense. For comparison, Pluto
traverses an orbit that goes from 29 to
49 AU fairly elliptical shown in purple
there just crossing with Neptune's orbit
in blue but Sedna is further away 76 to
936 and so we were lucky to catch this
again at
perihelion at its close approach to the
sun when it's brightest and we can tell
from looking at light that it's very
very red in color. And this seems to be
something that occurs with objects from
the deep outer solar system. We see the
same red material on things like Pluto
and the moon of Neptune called Triton.
They're often called tholins, um,
which refers to a mixture of organic
chemicals containing carbon, hydrogen,
and nitrogen. uh a bit of a chemical
soup on their surface. So interesting
indeed from the chemical point of
view. The other one on the the map for
comparison was 2012
VP113 and at the time Joe Biden was vice
president and as this got catalog number
VP nickname for this one is Biden.
It's a little smaller than Sednner, 600
km in diameter and in a somewhat shorter
orbit, only taking
4,268 years to go around from 80 AU to
462 AU. Now, that 80 figure for its
closest approach still makes it the
record holder for the most distant close
approach to the sun known. And in this
case, you can see it. It's been taken
with three different color filters
giving a red, green, and blue dot
overlaid for a moving object rather than
an animated picture. But you get the
idea that that was a moving object. And
the surface color of it again seems red,
but not as red as uh Sedna. So somewhat
curious that this one doesn't seem to
have as many of those tholins on it. So
what about the goblin? Well, it was the
third of what we now call the Sednoids
to be discovered. That's why I'm
comparing it with Sedna and VP 113
there. But the less red color that
suggests that it might well have been
formed closer into the
sun nearer the realm of the giant
planets and then scattered out into this
much longer orbit. to be truthful. We
don't know. This is a speculation trying
to account for the color. Other
scenarios for it
exist. But tracking these orbits, you
can immediately see in this picture that
actually the perihelion point for all
three of those objects are pretty close
together and that their long axis are
all pointing to the right on this
diagram. In fact, we've found quite a
lot more Sednoids. Um, and here's some
of them. We don't have the goblin marked
on this map. We do have VP 113 and Sedna
and a few more. And the more you plot,
the more you find that their perihelons
are all lining up roughly in that same
region of the solar system. And then
they're all angling away over one half
of the diagram. It's as if there's
something wrong with the other side of
the solar system. And that led various
people, including Mike Brown, to
speculate that there was a ninth planet
marshalling these a giant planet in the
outer solar system that we had not
discovered that was causing all of this
curious
alignment. Well, he reckoned there was a
very substantial chance that that
alignment couldn't be by chance. And
then we started finding more sedoids and
it increased the chance when we found
this one 2014
SR349. And then 2013 FT28 had its orbit
determined and it was here. And so we're
confused. We don't know whether that is
evidence for or against the existence of
planet 9. It's got a a fairly tight
orbit. Um, and its orbit would not
really intersect that of planet 9. Maybe
it's managed to get into some sort of
resonance with it. Um, a sort of 3:1
orbital resonance or something
stabilizing it in that position. We
don't
know. But all of these objects are deep
in the outer solar system. We were
calling this the scattered disc for a
while, distinguishing it from the Kiper
belt where Pluto and Aerys and other
trans neptunian objects were being
identified round about that 50 AU mark,
30 to 50 AU. Um, and they're shown in
this diagram on the left as all of the
colored dots with the sun in the center
and J, S, U, and N, the major planets,
Jupiter, Saturn, Uranus, and Neptune.
Um, and the gaps at the bottom right of
the uh Kiper belt diagram there, that's
just where we had not observed. So, it's
not a feature, it's an artifact.
So the equiper belt seems to go right
around, but then it seems to curiously
stop round about the point where the
orbit would take twice as long as that
of Neptune at 47.8 AU, the 1:2 resonance
with Neptune. This seems to suddenly be
what's called the Kiper cliff where the
number of objects in the Kiper belt
drops off perhaps as a result of these
gravitational interaction with Neptune.
There are a few further out at the 2 to5
resonance at 55 AU, but essentially the
Kiper belt is a fairly tightly
constrained ring of material spanning
that uh 35 out to about 50
AU distance shown in the right hand
orbital diagram there and in the chart
of the number of objects. And then we
have the
sedoids with the goblin being the one
with the most extreme orbit. And I'm not
going to try and say its name that's
written there again because I'll only
mess it
up. So these were thought to be not
kiper belt objects but part of something
that might be the scattered
disc. But there is another possibility
which is that these are members of the
inner part of the cloud which also goes
by the name the hills cloud and it's a
theoretical disc of icy bodies that
persists between about a,00and and
2,500 astronomical units way out in that
central plane. The inner cloud or the
hills cloud would be a disc of material
rather than a full sphere.
The full sphere of the outer part of the
ot cloud is responsible for many of the
long period comets that seem to come in
from largely random directions as if
they're all originating anywhere on that
sphere. But there seem to be a lot of
objects associated with this inner part
of the uh structure which is more of a
flat disc and it may be that that flat
disc opens outwards into the full cloud
as is shown in the diagram there. We
still don't know. We've not really
discovered an object in the ought cloud
at all yet. So, uh, we are still
speculating and guessing and running
simulations that seem to fit to
determine this sort of stuff, but the
goblin going out to 20,000 AU is
definitely going out into the beginning
part of this hills cloud.
Now, if you think about it, the fact we
discovered the bodies like Sednner and
the goblin when they were on their close
approach to the sun at their perihelion
distance was because they were easy to
find there. And the ones that are not
easy to find because they're at their
uh much greater distances, they're
ahelion, further away from the sun where
they will spend a lot more time out in
those outer
reaches. Well, we can't find those at
the moment. Our technology is just not
good enough. And if you think about the
statistics of this, if we found the ones
that we found that were the easy ones to
find, there could be as many as 2
million objects about 40 kilometers in
diameter or larger out there originating
from the inner part, that hill sphere.
Now, at that sort of mass, they would
add up to maybe the mass of a
decentsized dwarf planet like Pluto. So,
it's not an immense amount of material,
but it is a tremendous number of
objects. And there's this lovely map
again showing the segnoids and um the uh
the goblin there with its Hawaiian name
out to the bottom left again being one
of the more extreme ones. But their
orbits do seem to be wound around the
sun in these long elliptical paths, much
more elliptical than your typical kiper
belt object or your inner solar system
object which are much more spherical. So
quite amazing indeed. And then one or
two that are really quite extreme that
have been found. You can see Sedna
there, but you can see one or two that
are going off the bottom. 2012
DR30. Um, and one of the two at the top
there as well. Quite incredible. We
might have a bit more of a look at some
of these in another
video. And I just wanted to end with uh
a simulation, a picture from the goblin
looking back at the rest of the solar
system. So you have Pluto, Neptune,
Uranus, Saturn, Jupiter, the Sun, and
the inner planets, one or two other
objects marked out on there. Um, this
would be a fascinating view if we could
ever get a spacecraft out to visit some
of these objects, and I hope we do. I
hope I get to see it as
well. So, thanks very much. That was
once around the Goblin. A fascinating
little world in its own right. and just
goes to show how much more there is to
discover in terms of astronomy. Thanks a
lot.